Thanks for joining me today.
We'll be looking at the solid JS UI
framework, the next several hours will be
a workshop that will take you from
the fundamentals of reactivity,
all the way to building
solid applications.
While this is Intended to serve as
an introduction, we'll be getting in depth
with a lot of the key technologies that by
the time you're done, you'll have a firm
grasp on, not just solid, but pretty
much any UI framework you'd be using.
Who am I?
My name's Ryan Carniato,
I'm the creator of solid JS.
I've been in web development now,
I don't know, 25 years.
Started in the 90s making websites for
my band.
I played in a punk rock band that
actually happened to be called Mr. Solid.
That's where the framework
got its name from.
I actually even have the tattoo here to
prove it, this is solid and Old English.
But I've been doing web dev for a long
time, I have lived through table soup and
ASP.net and rails and jQuery,
before finding my passion for
modern frontend frameworks.
Through the 2010,
I worked almost a decade at a startup,
which is where I developed solid js.
I also afterwards worked at eBay for
a couple years,
working on their framework, Marco, and
now I'm doing open source at Netlify.
So what is Solid?
For many of you, this will be
the first time seeing Solid JS.
So I'd say, it's a declarative UI
library for building user interfaces.
If that sounds familiar,
it should, that's react's tagline.
But It is accurate for
many libraries and frameworks.
Solid is a JavaScript framework or
library,
depending on how you make the distinction,
that similar to things like React and
view, and Angular and spelt, and
has a lot of the same responsibilities.
Ultimately, to allow you
to build user interfaces.
But these days that includes a lot of
platforms, more than just the web.
With custom rendering, support for
things like WebGL and native.
So, these are all things that
you can do with Solid JS.
But, I mean,
let's get to the elephant in the room,
why would you look at
another JavaScript framework?
We have enough of those, right?
I'm gonna give a little bit of history.
Well, Solid JS has started to
kind of catch on recently.
I started this way back, I'd say 2016,
my first commit in a private repo,
and I didn't actually
open source until 2018.
I was building it and I thought,
maybe use it in my company.
And I opened Solid JS mostly just because
I wanted to enter some benchmarks.
See, my goal was kind of to bring
back fine grained reactivity.
And if you haven't heard it, there's some
older frameworks that use this approach.
Naco JS from the early 2010s was
kind of like primary inspiration.
And as a Naco developer,
I loved the patterns they had.
They had these composeble
primitives that you could reuse and
build the interfaces out of.
And I thought it was really powerful,
but the industry kind of moved on,
especially with things like React.
And there was a lot of performance claims
around things like the virtual DOM, and
I was a little bit confused by these.
So, things like the DOM was slow and
whatnot.
So I was like, let's re examine this.
So I kind of thought, maybe we just need
to look at this a little differently.
Maybe attack the problem
a little bit different.
And so I attacked and attacked, and
by mid 2018 Solid had taught pretty much
every JavaScript benchmark I could find.
JS framework benchmark, Js repaint
benchmark, UI bench, Jeremy asked him to
sit circles, demo, isomorphic benchmark,
basically anything it could find.
And honestly, that's really not
enough to choose a new framework,
because, sure, it looks good on paper.
Really, solid true in is how it changes
your perspective on JavaScript frameworks,
and it compasses this
through two main ideas.
First of all is reactivity,
reactivity is very core to this.
Reactivity is just a way of expressing
systems behaviors on a specific
implementation by treating or rendering
as kind of a reactive side effect.
Means we aren't tied to any specific
platform, as I mentioned before,
things like WebGL or, you can even put
a VDOM in reactivity if you wanted to.
And you can apply it to
all sorts of problems,
cuz what you get really
is a language of sorts.
Reactivity is really a language for
user interfaces.
And with Solid, that means we ship
a powerful set of primitives that you
can use to kind of construct
your user interfaces.
Solid js reactivity and kind of approach
to using things like JSX has actually
inspired other projects like mitosis from
builder IO, which lets you actually write
in a single language and
then output components in any framework.
So, this is a big foundation for us.
The other side is this departure
from the typical component model.
And I don't mean from
an authoring perspective,
it's that modern front-end web
development has been about components.
Class components, function components,
option components, web components, and for
good reason, they give us this
kind of module and capsule ration.
These building blocks we
use to build our apps.
And this is a good thing.
However, almost every JavaScript
framework ties their runtime change
models to this, the way things update or
tie to the components.
And Solid kinda lets us
rethink about that model.
We still have components as a pattern for
organizing our code, but
we don't have to worry about it from
a performance or mechanical perspective.
It's not about rear-ending and
memorization,
you kind of forget about that.
So, what are we covering today?
Today we're going to be
talking about Solid JS.
But as I mentioned, I'd really like to
promote a deeper understanding of these
kind of core concepts.
So, we're gonna start with introduction,
which we're doing now, but
then we're gonna really
dig into reactivity.
And we're gonna understand it, look at
how solid renders using reactivity.
And then a little bit later we're
gonna look at the fundamental
primitives behind Sol and
how we go towards building apps.
And get into some more advanced topics
towards the end of our session,
looking at stores and routing and
how to handle async data.
In terms of tools, basically, for
the most part I'm gonna be
using a lot of online tools.
Stuff like, CodeSandbox and
Stackblitz, for the examples.
You can also have CLI commands so you can
do it in VS code, if that's what you're
comfortable with, but,
everything's pretty much available online,
in terms of what we're
going to be building today.
And in terms of resources, most important
one probably is the course website.
This will have kind of an outline, high
level of everything that we're doing today
plus links to all the other resources.
I've also included a link
here to the GitHub.
I have a few other places where I've set
up some kind of lessons, so to speak,
like in CodeSandbox and
Solid Playground and Tutorial, but
we'll share these links again as we get
to the particular parts in the session.
I just wanna kind of
put these up up front.